# Managing Python Packages

:::{warning}
Since installing packages can have side effects on other extensions or the main application, here
are some best practices to adhere to:

**DO:**

* ✅ Always include a confirmation dialog that clearly communicates the installation process.
* ✅ Document the dependencies your module relies upon.
* ✅ Consider specifying version requirements using `~=X.Y` to avoid incompatible versions.
* ✅ Verify that all Python packages are distributed as Python wheels. This is particularly important
  for dependencies including compiled code, as installing a wheel eliminates the need for users to
  install a compiler.

**DON'T:**

* ❌ Do not install packages in use by core Slicer functionality or by other extensions.
* ❌ Do not install any packages in the global scope (outside of all classes and functions) or in the
  module class constructor. This can significantly slow down application startup, and it may even
  prevent the module from loading.
* ❌ Do not pin to a specific version of the package with `==`, as this will generate conflicts with
  other package versions. Pinning dependencies should be considered only in the context of custom
  applications where the deployment environment is tightly controlled. When in doubt, prefer the
  `~=` [Compatible Release][compatible-release] specifier.
  :::

[compatible-release]: https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/specifications/version-specifiers/#compatible-release

## Automatic Installation

This is the preferred method of managing packages, as it automatically handles _most_ of the best
practices described above. This requires extension developers to declare their dependencies in a
`requirements.txt`, and the {func}`slicer.packaging.Requirements` mechanism guarantees that no
module can violate the dependencies of another installed module.

:::{tip}
See the PyPA documentation about [Requirements Files][requirements] and
[Constraints Files][constraints] for more information. The documentation on the
[Requirements File Format][requirements-format] lists all the supported features.
:::

[constraints]: https://pip.pypa.io/en/stable/user_guide/#constraints-files

[requirements]: https://pip.pypa.io/en/stable/user_guide/#requirements-files

[requirements-format]: https://pip.pypa.io/en/stable/reference/requirements-file-format

### Creating a Suitable `requirements.txt`

To declare your dependencies, you must create a `requirements.txt` file that will be accessible when
your Scripted Loadable Module is installed in users' Slicer environments. To do this in a portable
way we use `importlib.resources`, so the `requirements.txt` file must be in a valid python package.

For example, say we already have a Scripted Loadable Module `Sample.py` (as generated by the
[Extension Wizard][extension-wizard]), with a directory structure like:

[extension-wizard]: /user_guide/modules/extensionwizard.md

```
Sample/
├── Resources/
├── Testing/
├── CMakeLists.txt
└── Sample.py
```

First, we must create a _Python package directory_ to hold our `requirements.txt`. A Python package
directory is just a folder which contains an `__init__.py` file, so it is recognized by the Python
`import` system. If you don't already have any Python package for your module, we recommend the
`lib` prefix for this. In our example, that is `libSample`.

:::{tip}
A Python package like `libSample` is a great place to put business logic for your extension. If you
already have a package for business logic, you can place your `requirements.txt` there instead of
creating a new one.
:::

Create the package directory, `__init__.py`, and `requirements.txt`.

```
Sample/
├── libSample/
│   ├── __init__.py
│   └── requirements.txt
├── Resources/
├── Testing/
├── CMakeLists.txt
└── Sample.py
```

It is also important to declare these new files in `CMakeLists.txt`. Add `libSample/__init__.py` to
the `MODULE_PYTHON_SCRIPTS` list, and add `libSample/requirements.txt` to the
`MODULE_PYTHON_RESOURCES` list.

Now, you can refer to `requirements.txt` by its identifier `libSample:requirements.txt` in a
`Requirements` block.

### Populating `requirements.txt`

Now populate the `requirements.txt` with your primary dependencies. For example, say we want to use
`pandas`. Suppose we've only tested our tool with version `2.2.1`, but we are careful not to use
deprecated features. In this case, use the [Compatible Release][compatible-release] specifier
`pandas~=2.2` and add this to `requirements.txt`. (If we _did_ use deprecated features, we'd want to
use `pandas~=2.2.1`).

:::{tip}
When in doubt, use `package~=X.Y` [Compatible Release][compatible-release]. Be very careful if you
use a more specific version specifier than this (eg. `~=X.Y.Z` or `<A.B.C`), as your extension may
become incompatible with other extensions.
:::

:::{warning}
Do not use `==` specifiers or hashes, as this almost guarantees incompatibility with other
extensions.

Do not use `-e` or `--editable` options.

Be cautious with VCS dependencies. Always use `@` and a
[separate constraints file](#separate-requirements-and-constraints).
:::

### Using the `Requirements` context manager

Add a `with Requirements` block at the top of your module file:

```py
from slicer.packaging import Requirements

with Requirements('libSample:requirements.txt'):
    import pandas as pd
```

This does a few things:

- It registers your requirements as constraints which cannot be overridden by other extensions. If
  you've written `pandas~=2.2`, you are _guaranteed_ that your users' Python environments will have
  a Pandas compatible with that version.
- It checks that your requirements do not conflict with Slicer core or any other extensions. If they
  do, a clear error message is shown and logged. Check your users' logs in bug reports!
- Requirements are not installed until `pd` is used. The `GuardedImport` creates a _proxy_ around
  the `pd` module, and doesn't actually import the library until the first time it is used via `.`
  access.
- The user is prompted before modifying their Python environment. If changes must be made to satisfy
  constraints of all installed extensions, a brief summary of changes is presented to the user.
  Changes are only applied if they click "OK" (or if the tool runs in a script environment where
  user interaction is not available).

Generally, this means you can use `pd` as if it were already installed. If it's installed in
your development environment, IntelliSense and similar static analysis should correctly recognize
the `import pandas as pd` statement.

For example, you might have code like:

```py
from slicer.packaging import Requirements

with Requirements('libSample:requirements.txt'):
    import pandas as pd


class SampleLogic(ScriptedLoadableModuleLogic):
    def load_data(self, path: Path):
        return pd.read_csv(path)
        #        ^ First access triggers installation, if necessary.
```

:::{warning}
This prompts installation _on first attribute access_. Recall one of the best practices:

* ❌ Do not install any packages in the global scope (outside of all classes and functions) or in the
  module class constructor. This can significantly slow down application startup, and it may even
  prevent the module from loading.

This means accessing attributes at the global level will trigger package installation during Slicer
startup.

```py
with Requirements('libSample:requirements.txt'):
    import pandas as pd

df: pd.DataFrame
#     ^ Triggers installation

pd.options.display.max_rows = 999
# ^ Triggers installation
```

To support type annotations, avoid the issue with `from __future__ import annotations`.

```python
from __future__ import annotations

with Requirements('libSample:requirements.txt'):
    import pandas as pd

df: pd.DataFrame
#     ^ Does NOT trigger installation
```

Move any other such usages into your module's widget `setup` method, and possibly use
[](#manual-Requirements-resolution) for finer control of when the dependencies are resolved.

See [](#proxy-modules) for details on how this works.
:::

### Separate Requirements and Constraints

Since not all statements allowed by `requirements.txt` are allowed by `constraints.txt`, it may be
necessary to declare requirements and constraints separately. For example, it is not possible to
specify extras like `pandas[excel]` in constraints files.

```python
with Requirements(
        requirements='libSample:requirements.txt',
        constraints='libSample:constraints.txt',
):
    import pandas as pd
```

The constraints are used to define which versions of packages may be changed by other modules, and
the requirements are used to install the packages for this module. Thus it is only valid if
`requirements.txt` will satisfy `constraints.txt`.

### Multiple Import Groups

It is possible to include multiple import groups in a single file. If used with care, this allows
reducing footprint if certain features are never used.

```python
with Requirements('libSample:ml-requires.txt'):
    import torch

with Requirements('libSample:images-requires.txt'):
    import itk
```

:::{warning}
Do not import the same package from multiple import groups in the same file.

It is possible to do this with `import as`, but not recommended. A better solution is
[](#manual-Requirements-resolution).

```python
with Requirements(...):
    import itk as itk_a

with Requirements(...):
    import itk as itk_b
```

:::

### Proxy Modules

`Requirements` produces _Lazy Proxy Modules_. Importing the proxy _does not_ import the actual
module until the first time any module attributes (classes, functions, sub-modules, etc.) are
accessed. At that point, any required packages are installed and the real module is imported.

You can test if a module is `slicer.packaging.LazyProxyModule` via `isinstance`.

```python
with Requirements(...):
    import itk

print(itk)  # <module 'itk' (<LazyProxyLoader object at 0x737286a4cfd0>)>
print(isinstance(itk, LazyProxyModule))  # True
```

If a module has _already_ been imported, for example by a badly-behaved Slicer extension that
installed and imported a dependency at startup, then the already loaded module will be imported
instead _and a proxy will not be used_.

```python
import itk  # Assume ITK is already installed.

with Requirements(...):
    import itk

print(itk)  # itk<module 'itk' from 'site-packages/itk/__init__.py'>
print(isinstance(itk, LazyProxyModule))  # False
```

If a proxy module cannot be used in some situation, use the function `slicer.packaging.real_module`
to obtain the
backing module from the proxy module.

```python
with Requirements(...):
    import itk

print(itk)  # <module 'itk' (<LazyProxyLoader object at 0x7f9453a50790>)>
print(real_module(itk))  # <module 'itk' from 'site-packages/itk/__init__.py'>
```

To avoid breaking other modules which do not use the `Requirements` functionality, no `import`
statements that occur outside a `with Requirements` block are never affected. In particular:
_local imports cannot guarantee that the dependencies have been resolved._

```python
with Requirements(...):
    import itk

import itk  # ModuleNotFoundError: No module named 'itk'
```

### Manual `Requirements` Resolution

It is also possible use `Requirements` manually, without the context manager, and explicitly
indicate when the dependencies should be resolved. Calling `resolve()` multiple times has no runtime
penalty, so use it freely.

```python
requirements = Requirements(...)

try:
    requirements.resolve()
    import itk
except InstallationAbortedError:
    ...  # handle rejection
except CalledProcessError:
    ...  # handle installation failure
```

If the user rejects installation the first time, that rejection is maintained and the user will not
be prompted again. It is possible to undo this with `reset_rejection()`; then the next `resolve()`
would show the prompt.

You can mix manual resolution and automatic resolution.

```python
with Requirements(...) as requirements:
    import itk

try:
    requirements.resolve()
except InstallationAbortedError:
  ...  # handle rejection
except CalledProcessError:
  ...  # handle installation failure
```

### Prototyping with `extra_args`

For convenience, `Requirements` supports an optional keyword-only argument `extra_args`, which
will be passed directly `pip_install`. By passing `None` as the resource identifier for
`requirements`, it is possible to completely define the dependency group without any boilerplate:
no Python package directory, no `requirements.txt`, and no `CMakeLists` modifications.

:::{danger}
While this is much easier for prototyping modules and sharing small scripts, _do not use this_ for
published extensions except in exceptional situations. There is no clear way to declare constraints
when used in this way, so expect that other extensions may break your module if you do this.

```python
with Requirements(None, extra_args='itk'):
    import itk
```
:::

Remember that `requirements.txt` supports many pip options, so `extra_args` is almost certainly not
necessary in production - although you may need to provide
[separate requirements and constraints](#separate-requirements-and-constraints). See
[Requirements File Format][requirements-format] for full details.

## Manual Installation

The utility functions `slicer.util.pip_install` and `slicer.util.pip_uninstall` are still available
for backward compatibility and usage from the Python console.

### `pip_install`

All the prior guidance and best practices here still apply, _except_ that manually showing a prompt
to the user is no longer necessary as `pip_install` automatically requests user confirmation. Pass
`interactive=False` to disable this and rely on existing confirmation systems.

```python
def on_button_press(self):
    pip_install('-U pandas', interactive=True)  # Upgrade pandas without prompting the user.
```

:::{danger}
Do not use `pip_uninstall`. Prefer `pip_install` with [version specifiers][specifiers] if a
package downgrade is necessary.

It is not possible to apply constraints to `pip_uninstall` and so this function will almost
certainly break functionality. Use sparingly and with great care.
:::

[specifiers]: https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/specifications/version-specifiers/

### `FileIdentifier` and `register_constraints`

`requirements.txt` and `constraints.txt` files are identified by a `FileIdentifier` object. This
contains:

- A `name` for the requirements to be shown in prompts to the user. (Typically the Slicer module
  name)
- A resource `identifier` of the form `'package:filename'`, used by `importlib.resources` to locate
  the file at runtime.

A `FileIdentifier` identifying a [Requirements File][requirements] may be passed to `pip_install`.

```python
pip_install(requirements=FileIdentifier(
    'Sample Image Processing Pipeline',
    'libSample:requirements.txt',
))
```

A `FileIdentifier` identifying a [Constraints File][constraints] may be passed to
`register_constraints` to enforce constraints in all subsequent `pip_install` usages. If an
operation _would_ violate the constraint, the name is shown in the user prompt and error logs.

`register_constraints` _should_ be called during Slicer startup to ensure all subsequent
`pip_install` will use the constraints file.

```python
register_constraints(FileIdentifier(
    'Sample Image Processing Pipeline',
    'libSample:constraints.txt',
    None,
))
```

## UV and Pip Compatibility

Note that `pip_install` now uses `uv pip install` as its backing implementation, for better speed
when resolving constraints. This is _almost_ a drop-in replacement for `pip install`, but there are
some inconsistencies.

Be mindful of this and refer to [astral.sh/uv/pip/compatibility][pip-compat] for details.

[pip-compat]: https://docs.astral.sh/uv/pip/compatibility/

## Messages and Errors

### Confirmation Dialogs

Any usage of `pip_install` or `Requirements` that would make changes to the Python environment,
if user interaction is available, will show a confirmation to the user with a summary of changes.

For example, `pip_install('-U flywheel')` might present to the user:

```
Resolving dependencies for -U flywheel.
Resolved 7 packages in 509ms
Would download 1 package
Would uninstall 1 package
Would install 1 package
 - flywheel==0.5.3
 + flywheel==0.5.4
```

If the user accepts these changes, they will be applied. If the user rejects them, a
`InstallationAbortedError` is raised and may be handled.

### Constraints Resolution

Any usage of `pip_install` or `Requirements` that would break the dependencies of another
registered constraint (ie. Slicer Core or another `Requirements` block) will refuse to do so,
present a summary to the user, and add detailed messages to the logs.

For example, `pip_install('numpy~=1.25.0')` might show:

```
Cannot install packages for 'numpy~=1.25.0' because it would violate constraints:

* Slicer Core
* SampleModule

× No solution found when resolving dependencies:
╰─▶ Because you require numpy>=1.25.0,<1.26.dev0 and numpy==1.26.4, we can conclude that your requirements are unsatisfiable.
```

### Installation Failure

In some cases, constraints may be satisfied and the user may accept installation, but the install
process fails. Usually this is due to some network or filesystem error, or due to a missing build
constraint (eg. compilers, CUDA drivers, etc.). In any case, the `uv` process's output is logged and
a `CalledProcessError` is raised and may be handled.

### Invalid Arguments

The Slicer `pip_install()` layer does not validate version specifiers or other `pip` arguments;
these are reported by the `uv` process. For example `error: unexpected argument` or invalid
constraints `error: failed to parse` might appear here. In any case, the `uv` process's output is
logged and a `CalledProcessError` is raised and may be handled.
